---
layout: post
title: "Flask n' iOS Part 1: Setting up Flask & iOS for Mac & Linux (linux is flask only)"
author: Trevor Senior
date: 2016-08-05
updated: 2016-08-05
headerImg: ""
headingTextColor: "#FEFEFE"
categories: create new-post
---


need to 

The dependencies mac:

brew installation  http://brew.sh/
install from this link

brew install python
(gets pip as well)

open a new terminal window

should have 2.712

pip install flask

stop here, open a terminal
python
import flask


Might need to:
uninstall brew, google uninstall brew mac
 http://www.curvve.com/blog/guides/2013/uninstall-homebrew-mac-osx/
 chown <username> /usr/local   (get username from whoami)
brew prune



iOS: 
xcode from mac app store (press apple button top left corner and press app store), 
https://itunes.apple.com/ca/app/xcode/id497799835?mt=12


cocoapod (need gems but it should come with it)
sudo gem install cocoapods
https://guides.cocoapods.org/using/getting-started.html




//TODO ill writeup instructions for flask to setup a single endpoint, returns an json array. Andy will parse
//TODO GET AND POST with an array that persists so long as the server is running
//TODO send Andy url, he doesn't care where it's hosted, just so long as it's free for pepes there


//TODO Andy, text form, and display of list, post and get

#Server Setup

###Post Contents
######1. Overview
######2. Creating the Server & Installing Dependencies
######3. Flask & gunicorn Configuration
######4. Nginx Configuration


####1. Overview

This part of the workshop will be focused on application setup, everyone's favorite part of hacking. Thus, we'll be using digital ocean, because it doesn't come with all the security hassles that AWS enforces. If you're going to be doing production level stuff, then we recommend using AWS or GCP, since they make it difficult to botch initial security group configurations. Let's get started m80s! Oh wait, one more thing, why are we using flask? This workshop is meant for beginners. Flask & python do an incredible job at reducing the mental gymnastics required to get something up and running  without obfuscating too much work that it seems like black magic is happening under the hood. This makes it the perfect choice for you to learn the high level components of server communication with mobile devices. If you would like to know more about how flask works with the operating system, and how you could build your own web framework, then check out this surprisingly short, but incredibly useful network programming guide: http://beej.us/guide/bgnet/output/html/multipage/index.html

Without further adu, let us begin!



####2. Creating the Server & Installing Dependencies

Go to https://www.digitalocean.com and create a 16.04 ubuntu droplet. Digital Ocean will send you the deetz about this server via email so that you can login. 

Now from your local machine, access the server via
```
ssh root@<insert your droplet IP address here>
```

Once you have access to the remote server, let's start by creating a new user on the server to isolate all our changes:

```
adduser sammy
```
No need to worry about the details for sammy. Now let's add sammy to the sudo group, so that we won't have any socket permission hiccups later on:

```
usermod -aG sudo sammy
```

Fantastic! Now one last thing, ssh into sammy's account.

```
ssh sammy@<insert your droplet IP address here>
```

Now that we have that out of the way, let's start installing the python & nginx dependencies via the following ez commands:
```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install python-pip python-dev nginx
```

This is great, but let's say we also want to have a django application that has a bunch of legacy python packages. Remember kids, always practice safe server side dependency control. How can we isolate our swanky new flask application from the dinosaur django application? We'll use virtualenv. If you're coming from node, then think of this as a heavy duty version of packages.json. Enough talk, run these commands:

```
sudo pip install virtualenv
```

To use virtualenv, let's create our application's folder first:

```
mkdir ~/myproject
cd ~/myproject
```

Now let's tell virtualenv to create a new virtual environment, so that it can keep a track of what python dependencies (in this case, pip and python) belong to which virtual environment (in this case, the virtual environment called "myprojectenv").

```
virtualenv myprojectenv
```

If you check your directory, you'll see that virtualenv created a virtual environment file. You should activate this file using virtualenv before installing the rest of the dependencies by doing:

```
source myprojectenv/bin/activate
```

Great! Simple stuff, eh. 

####3. Flask & gunicorn Configuration
##### 3.1 Flask configuration
Alright, even though you're a 1337 ninja wizard 'rockstar' hacker in my books, we still have a lot of work to do. Let's move on to getting flask, testing it out, and then getting uswgi configured. Let's begin:

```
pip install gunicorn flask
```

Now we will actually use the flask web framework to code up an API endpoint, so that we can later run some logic if a mobile app contacts our server at that endpoint. Let's use nano to create the python file which will contain our code that uses flask:

```
nano ~/myproject/myproject.py
```

Now let's put the following python code in this file:

```
from flask import Flask, jsonify
app = Flask(__name__)

@app.route("/")
def hello():
    return "<h1 style='color:blue'>Hello There!</h1>"
    
@app.route('/data')
def names():
    data = {"names": ["John", "Jacob", "Julie", "Jennifer"]}
    return jsonify(data)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(host='0.0.0.0')
```

What is happening here? Two things, first let's just look at the following lines:

```
from flask import Flask
app = Flask(__name__)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(host='0.0.0.0')
```

the first thing happening is just defining the namespace for the ```Flask``` package to to use. Then, we tell ```app``` to run with the local hostname, which is always gonna be '0.0.0.0' for the ubuntu operating system. Now let's look at the other part.

```
@app.route("/")
def hello():
    return "<h1 style='color:blue'>Hello There!</h1>"

@app.route('/data')
def names():
    data = {"names": ["John", "Jacob", "Julie", "Jennifer"]}
    return jsonify(data)
```

This is a bit stranger looking. However, let's break it down. The '@' is part of python, and it is just a shorthand notation for decorators. Basically, the decorator here creates a flask route, and links this route with a function to run when that route is accessed, but the linked function is only run after the function that directly follows the '@' symbol has run. To read more about python and decorators, see here: https://realpython.com/blog/python/primer-on-python-decorators/

Now that we have that covered, let's test it out. First let's get rid of some pesky firewalls for port 5000:

```
sudo ufw allow 5000
```

Now, what we've all been waiting for, run it:

```
python myproject.py
```

Then you can access this application running on your server by using a browser like so:

```
http://server_domain_or_IP:5000
```

A big blue hello world should show up. If it didn't, throw your hands in the air and let an instructor know. Assuming it did, we can go back to our terminal and terminate the python program via ctrl-c

##### 3.2 gunicorn Configuration

I don't know about you, but that was way too exciting for me, let's slow it down a bit. Let's configure gunicorn to work with our flask application. First off, what is gunicorn? gunicorn is a pre-made server which is capable of interoperating with frameworks that run on wsgi like flask or django. The main idea here is that python has a protocol specification called wsgi, and so to serve our flask application, we need a server that can communicate properly with flask via wsgi. All of these things are open source, so please feel free to contribute to them if and when you feel comfortable.


First, create a file ```wsgi.py```

```
nano ~/myproject/wsgi.py
```

and then add the following code:

```
from myproject import app

if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run()
```
This file will serve as a way to pluck our ```app``` module from our ```myproject.py``` file, and then tell gunicorn that this is the application that will be receiving data.

Let's continue by entering the following in the terminal:

```
cd ~/myproject
gunicorn --bind 0.0.0.0:5000 wsgi:app
```

This will run the gunicorn server and configure it to bind to a socket with port 5000. Finally, the second argument supplies the name of the entry point file and it's type, or ```wsgi.py``` with type ```app```.

Now, access this application running on your server by using a browser like so:

```
http://server_domain_or_IP:5000
```

Is the big blue text still there? Yes? Good! Let's terminate the server, and continue hacking, but now let's do things *WITHOUT* the virtual environment running, so do this:

```
deactivate
```

Now, let's automate the actual ubuntu instance to run gunicorn on startup. Go ahead and create the following ```systemd``` file:

```
sudo nano /etc/systemd/system/myproject.service
```

systemd is a init system used by some flavors of linux, so we might as well take advantage of it since we're running ubuntu. Inside it, put the following content:

```
[Unit]
Description=Gunicorn instance to serve myproject
After=network.target

[Service]
User=sammy
Group=www-data
WorkingDirectory=/home/sammy/myproject
Environment="PATH=/home/sammy/myproject/myprojectenv/bin"
ExecStart=/home/sammy/myproject/myprojectenv/bin/gunicorn --workers 3 --bind unix:myproject.sock -m 007 wsgi:app

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

We can now start the Gunicorn service we created and enable it so that it starts at boot:

```
sudo systemctl start myproject
sudo systemctl enable myproject
```

####4. Nginx Configuration

```
sudo nano /etc/nginx/sites-available/myproject
```


```
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name <server IP address goes here>;

    location / {
        include proxy_params;
        proxy_pass http://unix:/home/sammy/myproject/myproject.sock;
    }
}
```

```
sudo ln -s /etc/nginx/sites-available/myproject /etc/nginx/sites-enabled
```

```
sudo nginx -t
```

```
sudo systemctl restart nginx
```


```
sudo ufw allow 'Nginx Full'
```

```
http://server_domain_or_IP
```




