---
layout: post
title: "Flask n' iOS Part 2: Building a Flask endpoint"
author: Trevor Senior
date: 2016-08-21
updated: 2016-08-21
headerImg: ""
headingTextColor: "#FEFEFE"
categories: flask ios
---


#Creating a Super Simple Flask Endpoint

###Post Contents
######1. Overview
######2. Creating the Super Simple Flask Endpoint
######3. Extending the Concepts with PostGresql


####1. Overview

In Flask n' iOS Part 1 we set up just the infrastructure for our endpoint, but we didn't actually write much logic in our endpoint. Therefore, it might be difficult to follow up that tutorial to do anything useful. In this tutorial, we're gonna be talking about data. Ultimately, a web application that acts as a server for a mobile application is handling data and most of the tasks related to that data. Tasks is a vague term which could mean handling a search query or storing data. In this post, we'll focus on the storage aspect of data, because most apps require some aspect of CRUD, (create, read, update, delete).

####2. Creating the Super Simple Flask Endpoint

In Flask n' iOS Part 1 we got to this point in our codebase:

```
from flask import Flask, jsonify, request
app = Flask(__name__)

@app.route("/")
def hello():
	return "<h1 style='color:blue'>Hello There!</h1>"

if __name__ == "__main__":
	app.run(host='0.0.0.0',debug=True)
```

Let's just practice editing and restarting our server with a tiny change. Change 'Hello There!' to be 'Hello World'. If you look at your server on the '/' route, you'll see that your change to the myproject.py file did not update what was being served. In order to update gunicorn and nginx, we have to restart them like so,

```
sudo systemctl restart myproject
sudo systemctl restart nginx
```
Now if you view the '/' route again, it should have updated the html text to be 'Hello World'. Onward!

```

data = {'links':[]}

@app.route('/data', methods=['POST', 'GET'])
def names():
	
	if request.method == 'GET':
		return jsonify(data)

	if request.method == 'POST':
		content = request.get_json()
		if content is not None:
			link = content['link']
			data['links'].append(link)
			return jsonify(data)

```

